designation_records/A.2.5-C.1.3-E.3.1-E-4-F.4.1-G.1-etc_2025-09-07.md, before:

# Designation of multiple A.2 and B.1 lineages

Transmission of descendants of A.2 (Nigerian outbreak) and B.1 (2022 global outbreak) continues. The new lineage designations aim to capture recent circulation as revealed by public genomes.

The newly designated lineages are B.1.23; D.1 (B.1.6.1); E.1, E.2, E.3 (all children of C.1.1); and F.1, F.2, F.3, F.4, F.5, and F.6 (children of B.1.20). With these designations, the B.1 descendants are more clearly distinguished from each other.

All new lineages satisfy the criteria for lineage designation last updated in October 2023:

- International spread (not confined to a single country)
- Having at least 2 mutation above the parent lineage (increased from 1)
- Containing at least 15 sequences or plausibly represent undersampled diversity
- Clear common phylogenetic structure (no uncertainty about possibly being designated as 2 lineages instead of 1)
- Having at least one openly available high quality reference sequence

### G.1 (alias of A.2.2.1)

Sierra Leone outbreak lineage first described <https://virological.org/t/genomic-epidemiology-of-mpox-virus-in-sierra-leone/995>

The Github issue is at <https://github.com/mpxv-lineages/lineage-designation/issues/46>

### A.2.4

A.2.4 is an A.2 descendant lineage that was sampled in 2022, mostly in Ghana and once in the US.

### A.2.5

A.2.5 is an A.2 descendant lineage that was sampled in Nigeria in the second half of 2022. It is designated so that all major A.2 lineages have names.

### H.1 (alias of A.2.1.1)

H.1 is a descendant of A.2.1 with continued circulation particularly in South Asia, per GISAID-only data.

### H.2 (alias of A.2.1.2)

H.2 is a descendant of A.2.1 with continued circulation particularly in South Asia per GISAID-only data.

### J.1 (alias of B.1.22.1)

J.1 is a descendant of B.1.22 with continued circulation in Brazil (GISAID-only sequences), the US and Europe.

### C.1.2

C.1.2 is a descendant of C.1 with circulation in South-East Asia and recently also Europe and the US.

### C.1.3

C.1.3 is a descendant of C.1 with circulation in South-East Asia, particularly Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam.

### E.4

E.4 is a C.1.1 descendant with circulation in China and Australia.

### E.1.1

E.1.1 is an E.1 descendant with circulation in Europe and the US.

### E.2.1

E.2.1 is an E.2 descendant with circulation in Europe.

### E.3.1

E.3.1 is an E.3 descendant with circulation in Europe and the US.

### F.2.1

F.2.1 is an F.2 descendant with recent circulation in Europe.

### F.4.1

F.4.1 is an F.4 descendant with recent circulation in Europe and the US.

Commit message:

Fix: forgotten F.1.1 designation record entry (#49)
Added F.1.1 lineage description with circulation information for US, Canada, Peru and Vietnam.

Added script to auto-generate a TSV file with the representative sequences and their INSDC and Pathoplexus accessions for downstream usage.

designation_records/A.2.5-C.1.3-E.3.1-E-4-F.4.1-G.1-etc_2025-09-07.md, after:

# Designation of multiple A.2 and B.1 lineages

Transmission of descendants of A.2 (Nigerian outbreak) and B.1 (2022 global outbreak) continues. The new lineage designations aim to capture recent circulation as revealed by public genomes.

The newly designated lineages are B.1.23; D.1 (B.1.6.1); E.1, E.2, E.3 (all children of C.1.1); and F.1, F.2, F.3, F.4, F.5, and F.6 (children of B.1.20). With these designations, the B.1 descendants are more clearly distinguished from each other.

All new lineages satisfy the criteria for lineage designation last updated in October 2023:

- International spread (not confined to a single country)
- Having at least 2 mutation above the parent lineage (increased from 1)
- Containing at least 15 sequences or plausibly represent undersampled diversity
- Clear common phylogenetic structure (no uncertainty about possibly being designated as 2 lineages instead of 1)
- Having at least one openly available high quality reference sequence

### G.1 (alias of A.2.2.1)

Sierra Leone outbreak lineage first described <https://virological.org/t/genomic-epidemiology-of-mpox-virus-in-sierra-leone/995>

The Github issue is at <https://github.com/mpxv-lineages/lineage-designation/issues/46>

### A.2.4

A.2.4 is an A.2 descendant lineage that was sampled in 2022, mostly in Ghana and once in the US.

### A.2.5

A.2.5 is an A.2 descendant lineage that was sampled in Nigeria in the second half of 2022. It is designated so that all major A.2 lineages have names.

### H.1 (alias of A.2.1.1)

H.1 is a descendant of A.2.1 with continued circulation particularly in South Asia, per GISAID-only data.

### H.2 (alias of A.2.1.2)

H.2 is a descendant of A.2.1 with continued circulation particularly in South Asia per GISAID-only data.

### J.1 (alias of B.1.22.1)

J.1 is a descendant of B.1.22 with continued circulation in Brazil (GISAID-only sequences), the US and Europe.

### C.1.2

C.1.2 is a descendant of C.1 with circulation in South-East Asia and recently also Europe and the US.

### C.1.3

C.1.3 is a descendant of C.1 with circulation in South-East Asia, particularly Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam.

### E.4

E.4 is a C.1.1 descendant with circulation in China and Australia.

### E.1.1

E.1.1 is an E.1 descendant with circulation in Europe and the US.

### E.2.1

E.2.1 is an E.2 descendant with circulation in Europe.

### E.3.1

E.3.1 is an E.3 descendant with circulation in Europe and the US.

### F.1.1

F.1.1 is an F.1 descendant with circulation in the US, Canada, Peru and Vietnam.

### F.2.1

F.2.1 is an F.2 descendant with recent circulation in Europe.

### F.4.1

F.4.1 is an F.4 descendant with recent circulation in Europe and the US.
